Eloge Ethisse Enza Yamissi (born 23 January 1983) is a Central African former professional footballer who played as a midfielder. ==Club career== Born in Bangui, Central African Republic, Yamissi started his playing career at Bordeaux. He was there one season and did not make a first team appearance. He then signed for La Roche VF, spending one season there, playing six games. He then moved to Olympique Alès, where he played only four games, before moving to Nîmes Olympique, where his career began to take off, playing 52 games and scoring four goals. His potential was noticed by Troyes AC, which promptly signed him in 2005, when it was in Ligue 1. He experienced several ups and downs at the club, being relegated twice, and winning promotion twice too. From 2011, he was club captain, which he led to promotion to Ligue 1 once again at the end of the 2011–12 season. He joined Valenciennes FC in 2013 and played five seasons for the club before being released in 2018. In February 2019 he joined Annecy FC. On 28 May 2020, it was announced that his contract at Annecy, which had just been promoted to the Championnat National, would not be renewed. In summer 2022, after two seasons at Racing Besançon, Yamissi retired from playing and became assistant coach to David Le Frapper at the club. ==International career== Since its reformation in 2010, Enza Yamissi is a member of the Central African national team, which he captained on several occasions. ==Personal life== Eloge is the brother of the Central African Republic national team player Manassé Enza-Yamissi.Le contingent des footballeurs centrafricains évoluant en Europe (centrafriquefootball.com) ==Career statistics== :Scores and results list Central African Republic's goal tally first, score column indicates score after each Enza Yamissi goal. List of international goals scored by Eloge Enza Yamissi No. Date Venue Opponent Score Result Competition 1 5 June 2016 Barthélemy Boganda Stadium, Bangui, Central African Republic 2–0 3–1 2017 Africa Cup of Nations qualification ==References== ==External links== * * Category:1983 births Category:Living people Category:Footballers from Bangui Category:French sportspeople of Central African Republic descent Category:French footballers Category:Central African Republic footballers Category:Men's association football midfielders Category:Central African Republic men's international footballers Category:La Roche VF players Category:Olympique Alès players Category:Nîmes Olympique players Category:ES Troyes AC players Category:Valenciennes FC players Category:FC Annecy players Category:Racing Besançon players Category:Ligue 1 players Category:Ligue 2 players Category:Championnat National players Category:Championnat National 2 players Category:Championnat National 3 players